Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Hiram Lewis. He's a professor of
History at Brigham Young University Idaho. And today we're
talking about his book written together with Verlin Lewis,
the myth of left and right, how the political
spectrum misleads and harms Americans. So, Doctor Louis, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to have everyone.
Mhm Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here.
So let's start perhaps with the premise of the
book. So you get into ideology in the book.
And uh at the very beginning, you mentioned the
fact that you don't think or at least you
make the claim that standard explanations for political polarization,
which is some thing that people are very much
worried about nowadays, particularly in America explanations like media
echo chambers party polarization, racism status, anxiety, social hoop
and others are not enough to explain. Uh uh
I mean, uh ba basically to explain the, the
issues you explore in the book. So why do
we also need ideology and why do you think
that these explanations are not enough?
Yeah, because ideas have consequences and when our ideas
are wrong, when our concepts are wrong, then things
go terribly wrong in whatever domain we're mis conceptualizing.
So, for instance, in the 19th century and earlier
doctors had a misconception of how the body worked.
They thought that health was promoted by having a
balance of four humors. And that mis conceptualization was
extremely prevalent and it caused doctors to kill who
knows how many people. So doctors killed far more
people than they saved in the 18th century. And
for most of the 19th century, because that mis
conceptualization, read them, led them to diagnose things incorrectly
and therefore to treat things incorrectly. And we say
that a mis conceptualization is having the same effect
on politics today. And so, yeah, there's a lot
of things wrong with politics, but we could sure
improve it by getting our concepts better and thinking
about it in a more accurate and clear way.
And what is the standard view that people tend
to have of ideology? There is what in your
book, you call the essentialist theory of ideology? Could
you explain that?
Yeah. Sure. So the standard view, the way that
most people think of ideology and the way that
I was taught it and the way that i
it's still taught today in political science classes and
civics classes and you know, even high school government
classes for heaven's sake is the idea that politics
is all about. One big thing that we have
big disagreements because there's, there's one issue and everybody
has disagreed radically on that one issue. Now, the
funny thing is, is everyone has disagrees about what
that one issue is, but they're all convinced that
there's just one big one and a standard, a
standard view of what that one issue is, is
changed. That's what I was taught that, that you're,
you're somewhere on a spectrum, uh, a left right,
political spectrum based on your view of change. So
if you're really in favor of change, really, really
in favor of it, then you're on the far
left. If you're really, really against change, then you're
on the far right. And then if you like
some change, but not too much, you're on the
center left, if you're against change, but not too
against change or on the center, right and so
forth. And the idea being that there aren't a
lot of issues in politics, there's just one and,
and the stance you take on that one big
issue determines your stance on all the other issues.
Um So that's the essentialist theory of ideology or
we might call it the monist theory of politics.
It's the idea that politics is just about one
big thing. And so the, the explanation people have
today as to why there's so much discord in
politics is because our two parties have taken that
one issue to extremes. The Democrats, according to the
standard of explanation have moved to the left and
the Republicans, according to the standard explanation have moved
to the extreme, right. This is what everybody's saying
and it's just completely false. There's no evidence that
it's true. Uh, BUT people say it and they
think if they say it enough times it'll become
true by repetition but it's not.
But about that view, of course, you've already mentioned
at least one issue or in your view, what
one of the issues is there. But what are
perhaps some of the biggest misunderstandings that in your
view, people have about political ideology?
Yeah. Well, I mean, the idea that there's just
one issue in politics is the big misunderstanding that
we're trying to puncture. And so they, instead of
looking at politics in a pluralistic way and saying,
you know, there's one issue and that size of
government and the Republican Party is much more favorable
to big government and it ever has been in
its history. George W Bush was the biggest spender
in the history of this country. He was by
far the biggest government president of all times. So
you can say, hey, he was in favor of
big government, there's a scale of big to small
government and he was more of a big government
guy. That's not too hard to say. Uh, YOU
could say George W Bush was more of a
militarist, he believed in invading countries, um uh to
spread democracy and so forth. That's another issue, more
or less military intervention. But instead of looking at
those as two separate issues and discussing Bush and
his policies in terms of those two distinct issues,
people simply said George W Bush moved the Republican
party to the extreme, right? Pretending that there was
just one issue pretending that George W Bush hates
change. And therefore, since he hates change, he's also
a rabid racist. Uh, HE also wants to close
the border and throw out all illegal immigrants. He
also wants to invade foreign countries because he's a
militarist. He also wants to cut government spending and
these kinds of things. And that was just all
nonsense. You have to look issue by issue. You
get an accurate conception of what politics is about
and, and, and pretending there's just one issue and
that Bush can be explained, can be placed on
the far right of a one issue spectrum is
just so destructive to public discourse. Um So we're
asking for simply to do what we do in
every other realm of life and that's talk about
individual things. We talk granularly. When we go to
the doctor, we don't say uh the doctors and
say, well, let me place you on a, on
a medical spectrum. You have cancer. Well, uh cancer
and fractures and bruises are on the left. And
since you have cancer, we're gonna put you on
the left side of that spectrum. Now we just
say you have cancer. We don't pretend that your
cancer has anything to do with fractures. Likewise, we
should stop pretending that smaller government has anything to
do with militarism. They in fact work at cross
purposes and yet we call both radical expansions in
the size of the government to fight war and
radical decreases in governments in the name of free
markets. We call them both right wing when they're
opposite policies. So it really is uh uh the,
the best way to say it is silly. It's,
it's childish. Um And we need to stop being
childish. We need to grow up as a society.
We've grown up in other realms and we talk
about other realms profitably and medicine works much better
when we gave up our simple but flawed model.
And so we're saying that politics will work much
better once we give up our simple but flawed
model of politics.
But that's about what people commonly think about the
divide between the left and the right, particularly in
America. But we're also trying to approach things here
from a scientific perspective. And so what would you
say are perhaps some of the main testable predictions
that the essentialist theory of ideology makes? And where
do you think they fail the most?
That's the problem with the essentialist theory of ideology
because you're right. Science is all about prediction, isn't
it? It's all about testing theories out. It says
if our theory um is is false, all we
should find all of these things Right. So, so
falsification is a crucial scientific criteria. It says theories
predict and it doesn't just say it predicts everything.
A good theory says, we predict very specific things.
And if those things don't happen, we're willing to
uh consider our theory wrong. Uh WE'RE willing to
discon FRM our theory, the essentialist theory, nobody puts
forward dis discon confirmation criteria. So they say there's
only one issue in politics and that all these
many things go together. They say, for instance, if
you're um if you're uh in favor of abort,
um if you want to restrict a woman's right
to choose and you're pro-life, then you are also
um uh in favor of lower tariff rates. OK.
Those two things go together. What's your evidence? Well,
turns out that there isn't any evidence because it
10 years later that it switched and now people
who are pro-life are in favor of tariffs. So,
so the constant switching of the positions now that's
not what the essentialist theory would have predicted. They
said these things, two things go together because they're
bound because somehow being in favor of free trade
means you hate change and somehow being in favor
of a woman's right to choose means you hate
change. They're both hate change positions, supposedly according to
this very odd but very prevalent theory. OK. But
if they go together, then why did it suddenly
switch? Why is it now that people who are
pro-life are much more against free trade than people
who are pro choice. That's a flip in the
last 10 years. Likewise, if being pro life is
also connected fundamentally to um favoring the invasion of
Iraq. Well, then why is that switched? People who
are pro life are much less likely to favor
uh to be in favor of the invasion of
Iraq now. So, so these things just don't go
together and, and yet, instead of acknowledging that and
saying, oh, that's discon confirmation evidence, people make up
stories. And so these stories get very, very creative.
So the only quote evidence you can find for
the essentialist theory is expose storytelling, but we can
prove anything with expo stories. Um So astrology, I
i it's funny because none of my academic colleagues
believe in astrology. They all recognize that if you
go into an astrologer's office, they're just gonna say,
what month were you born in? What are your
behaviors? Well, let me cook up the story to
show how your behaviors fit your astrological science. And
let's say that's pseudoscience, it doesn't make predictions. This
is just telling the stories after the fact. And
almost all of my colleagues believe that there's one
issue in politics. They believe the essentialist theory that
there's just one big issue. And yet the evidence
when I ask them for evidence is all the
same kind of storytelling, the astrologer does. So that's
the problem with the Essentialist theory is it doesn't
make any predictions, it doesn't say what we should
find or what we shouldn't find. So, uh that,
that, that's the big problem there. We can go
into the pluralist theory, our theory of ideology if
you like. But um that's where we are with
the essentialist theory.
So to try to get past that sort of
storytelling that you talk about there in the book,
you present a social conception of ideology. So uh
what does it, uh I mean, basically what are
the main ideas associated with that conception?
Yeah. So the social theory of ideology or we
might call it the uh pluralist theory of ideology
or the pluralist theory of politics, I should say.
So the, the social theory says the reason you
find a correlation between distinct issues is social conformism.
So, so again, I said, there's no evidence for
the essentialist theory. Um THERE isn't or at least
there's none that can't better be explained by the
social theory. So, so, so the big piece of
evidence, I mean, the one that leads people to
believe in the, in the essentialist theory and the
reason it's so prevalent and the reason all of
my high school history teachers and all my college
history teachers and all of my high school government
teachers and all the rest believed in this political
spectrum is they said, well, it, it explains something,
it explains a curious sociological fact. It explains that
if you, if you find somebody who's pro life.
You can also predict with better than random accuracy,
their position on taxes and on the war in
Iraq and on affirmative action and on climate change,
right. So there is predictive value, it's not random.
So how do we explain this non randomness? How
do we explain this correlation? And so their default
explanation which is incorrect, but this is their explanation.
It says, well, they must be connected at some
deep level. There must just be one deep issue
binding everything else because we see correlations happening in
these binary packages and one package of positions. It's
you know, 100 distinct positions, but they're all called
left wing and they go together and if you
meet somebody who says I'm a left winger, they
all hold this package of left wing positions. Why
is it that those go together and then there's
this other package of things that go together and
when you meet someone who says I'm a conservative,
these things all go together. So why do you
find them, them bundling into two packages? And they
say, oh it must be that there's one deep
issue, binding them together and that one issue we
can, we can model one issue on a spectrum.
So we put people on a spectrum and so
this bin nity and and and and the packaging
and the correlating of distinct issue positions, people explain
it uh with an underlying essence. So, so that's
why it's so popular. It explains that. The problem
is, is that it's much better explained by the
social theory. And the social theory says those things
don't correlate because they're philosophically bound or bound by
a conservative temperament or a liberal temperament or your
underlying view on change, these different views are bound
together by a common tribe. So why is it
that somebody who is pro life is also more,
more likely than average to favor tax cuts? Well,
the first thing that we need to notice is
Ween and Kan have found uh they're these professors
of the University of Pennsylvania, but they found that,
that um that it doesn't correlate nearly as well
as people think uh the, the percent, you know,
it's slightly better than a corn coin flip. I
if somebody is pro-life, they're only slightly better than
a coin flip just slightly higher than 50% likely
to also believe in tax cuts, right? So, so
it's a very slight correlation, but we say that
correlation exists because people are conforming to their tribes.
So a common pattern would be, let's say you
have somebody who's a hardcore Catholic and they believe
strongly that abortion is murder. That's a respectable position.
II, I respect it. I don't necessarily agree with
all of it, but, ok. Well, once you believe
that, then how are you going to socialize into
politics where you're gonna anchor into a group? You're
gonna seek out other people who are pro-life and
those pro-life people will be on Fox News and
they will be in the Republican Party and they
will be at CPAC and they will be watching
Sean Hannity, right? They will, they will, they will
be on uh on the social media sites and
so forth. And once you find those people who
are pro-life, it turns out that they're also because
the Republican Party is also more like in favor
of tax cuts. So you will socialize into that
view of tax cuts, not because tax cuts and
opposing abortion are fundamentally connected. They're clearly not. But
because there is a social group, there is a
tribe that connects those two things electorally in a
party and you will get socialized into that party.
So we have a two party system, we don't
have a 11 spectrum system. The two party system
gives us the illusion of a single spectrum.
So just to take a a small step back
before we get into the implications that the social
or pluralist theory of political ideology has for how
we think about politics more generally. What are the
origins of the terms left and right, historically.
Yeah, as best as we can tell it originated
in the French revolution. So and again, you know,
people say two party system, not every country has
a two party system. Well true. But even if
you have a multiparty system, you do wind up
with two coalitions, right? And the reason is is
that is that political, human types are not binary,
but politics naturally coalesces into a binary because in
democratic systems, especially you have rule and oppose rule
and that's binary, right? So you have the ruler
and then the people like the whigs in England
who opposed the ruler and so forth. So it
had in the French revolution is you had the
king and the monarch and then you had those
people who tended to support the monarch and those
people who tend to oppose the monarch. So when
they met together in the assembly hall, the people
who were opposed to the monarch tended to started
to coalesce onto the left side of the hall
or the left wing, right. It was an architectural
term into the left wing of the hall. And
the people who tended to favor the monarch would
tend to coalesce into the right side or right
wing of the hall. So then we got this
idea that you how much you favor the king
could be placed on a spectrum, left wing, right
wing, more favoring on the right, less favoring on
the left kind of lukewarm towards the king in
the middle. Now again, when we're talking about one
issue, it works. If there really was just one
issue in politics, king or no king, it would
work. But politics isn't about one thing. It's not
just about abortion, it's not just about the king
and how you feel about a king. It's not
just about tax rates, it's not just about the
environment, it's about all these different things and we
can't model all of them on a single spectrum.
So unfortunately, because of that political spectrum originated in
France, that way of thinking of the idea of
a spectrum then spread. And so today, uh every
country that has been infected by European colonialism basically
now thinks in this really ridiculous terms of one
issue politics.
So I mean, in a sense, at least this
is also a historical accident, right? Because if it
had been any other way, instead of just a
split between two sides, it had been between three
sides, four sides. I mean, that would be the
norm now, at least in countries who were influenced
by these Western, let's say standard, right?
Sure. And that's what we see happening in these
different countries before the political spectrum takes. So, I
mean, it was true in the United States of
America too before about 1920. You know, Jonah Goldberg,
he was, he, he I was talking to him
and he was, you know, I think trying to
hint that maybe the political spectrum is natural because
he said, is there any advanced industrial democracy that
doesn't use the political spectrum or hasn't used the
political spectrum? I said yes, the United States before
1920 if you go, go back and look at
the writings of Abraham Lincoln or, or look at
the rhetoric of you know, William Jennings Bryan or,
or James Garfield or George Washington. For heaven's sake.
You just go back and look and, and there's
no talk, none of wings of left wing, right
wing, center, left center, right. This all came later.
Did we have a two party system? Sure that
people were not under the delusion that the two
parties were defined by a spectrum in the, you
could move along a spectrum because all the different
issues in politics went together. They didn't have that
delusion. They understood that you could be against tariffs
and in favor of a gold standard. Uh AND,
and be in favor of, I don't know, racial
equality, right? That these were three distinct things. So
Abraham Lincoln said I am against slavery. That's one
thing I am also in favor of the protective
tariff. That's another thing I'm also in favor of
subsidies for big business. That's another thing is that
left wing or right wing. It is, it, it
is and does not compute should shout back at
us because it's completely absurd to place Lincoln on
a spectrum when one, he didn't place him self
on a spectrum and two the diversity of positions
he took doesn't in any way line up with
either of our two parties or two ideologies today.
So, no, we didn't have to have a political
spectrum. It was a historical accident, I think, but
it was a, it was, it was a convenient
model when you have politics defined by two parties.
It's a very convenient model to allow the two
parties to, uh, gain loyalty. Because if we go
back to the way Lincoln did things and said,
hey, there's a bunch of issues and my party
stands for a whole bunch and, and you maybe
agree with some of them, maybe don't agree with
them. But I hope you'll vote Republican because you
believe in holding the union together, even if you
don't agree with me on tariffs, right? You know,
that's the way Lincoln approached things and that was
correct. We could go back to that but the
parties don't want to because currently uh they can,
they can say you have to support the party
and you have to give it all your loyalty
and all your energy and all your money because
we stand on the left side of the spectrum
and everything that is left wing is good. So
if you get a fundraising letter from the Democratic
Party that says Ricardo, please donate to the Democrats.
We stand uh we stand against the forces of
right wing fascism, please be a progressive advance the
cause of social justice and donate today. You're more
likely to get out your wallet and donate, right?
Fighting for justice, who, who, who's against that, fighting
against the forces on the other side, on the
extreme, right of the political spectrum like this is
very emotional, it's, it's very um catalyzing. But if
they told you the truth and said, Ricardo, our
party stands for a bunch of positions. They're not
related to each other. It's just a grab bag.
It's just AAA basket of issues. We hope you
agree with enough of them to donate. You're less
likely to get out your wallet. You're less likely
to go door to door, you're less likely to,
uh, to crusade for the cause, so to speak.
So II I think, you know, there are powerful
incentives to perpetuate the myth of left and right
out there. And that's why, you know, I'm glad
there's voices like you crying in the wilderness. And
it seems like people who have grown up in
other countries for what uh it seems like, you
know, you have to tell me if this is
correct, sorry to be interviewing you a little bit
here. But I'm guessing, you know, you came from
Brazil, you come to a different country and you
see that the political alignments are different. And so
you don't buy into the myth of left and
right as much because you see that the correlations
that exist here didn't necessarily exist in your country.
And therefore you get a sense that they're not
natural. And that's why foreigners have a much more
objective perspective on American politics because they see outside
this left, right stricture. Does that, does that sound
correct to you?
Yes. Yes. And I mean, here in Portugal, we
have many, many, many more than 20, I'm sorry.
Yeah. No, no worries. No worries. We have more
than two political parties. Of course, there are, there
are two of them that are the biggest ones
but, uh, this, the extreme right grew just in
these recent, uh, national general elections and we have
many other, more minor political parties. But, yeah, it's
not at all, just a two party political system.
So we, that, that idea that's very common in
America that we just have the Democrats or the
Republicans and the rest, I mean, that they might
be there, but they are never going to win
any elections. That's just for the woods.
Yeah. And, and I'm guessing that what is considered
right wing in your country is going to be
different than what's considered right wing here. So, so
it, it shows the contingency of the spectrum and
why it's so useless to use it because it
won't tell you cross cultural and cross contextual comparisons.
I mean, you constantly, I'm sure it happens in
your country too where if somebody is considered right
wing, they say, oh, you're just like Hitler. Well,
my goodness here in America, I mean, Hitler was
a militarist and yet currently the Republican Party is
left militarist than the Democrats and yet they're considered
extreme right wing. Uh Hitler was a socialist and
yet the Republicans are considered currently less socialist than
Democrats and they're considered right wing. So it just,
it, it doesn't help anything to lump people or,
or to place people on a spectrum along with
Hitler and Stalin when there are so many different
issues and so many different ways to bundle them.
And your country of Portugal is proof of that.
Uh WHAT is considered right wing in your country.
Your bundle is going to be different than the
American bundle will be different than the Chinese bundle
will be different than the Australian bundle and on
and on and on. And therefore pretending that there's
only two bundles you can see through that illusion
better than my fellow Americans. I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm
afraid.
000 yeah. And you're completely right about another point
that is even within the European Union, if you
compare across different countries, uh what you consider, right?
For example, in Germany is different from what you
see right here in Portugal and across the other
countries. It's more or less the same. I mean,
there are uh common uh areas, common issues that
people care about and that people classify as being
right wing or left wing or center or wherever.
But yeah, there there is the difference, there's definitely
differences across the countries here,
which which I think we think makes our point,
right? Because the social context is different in the
different countries. And so the the the different positions
will be bundled differently depending on the social. Whereas
if the, again, this is a prediction, the social
theory makes that different contexts will have different bundles.
Whereas the essentialist theory says, no, no, no, this
set of positions go together because they're anti change.
And therefore wherever you are anti change, they should
go together in the same way. But since they
don't go together in the same way, again, this
is evidence against the essentialist theory and yet in
favor of the social theory.
Uh I mean, just to give you a quick
example, I mean, just two examples there in the
US, for example, there are people politically that are
uh I mean, I'm not so sure. Uh uh
NOT so sure right now, but at least up
until recently you had people there that were climate
change deniers, right? Even politicians and so on here
in Portugal that virtually does not exist anymore, neither
the right nor the left. And for example, here
in Portugal, if someone was talking about just ending
universal health care, they would immediately be labeled extreme,
right? But immediately so.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. So, so the, the, yeah, sure.
The um range of opinions gonna differ co country
to country as well. Mhm.
Uh By the way, talking about the range of
opinions or, I mean, the issues of contention, what
would you say are perhaps and since we're focusing
on America, the main issues of contention between the
left and the right, or sometimes people refer to
the liberals and the conservatives, I mean, what are
the sorts of issues that people tend to associate
with each side of the political spectrum.
Hm. Well, it's always changing. Um, CURRENTLY it seems
like the big issue is one of the big
issues is immigration, right? So, uh Democrats, uh the,
the tribe left is generally more in favor of
open immigration. And uh Republicans, the tribe, right, are
generally considered uh more restrictive on immigration. So that's
a big one. Now again, if the, if the,
if the essentialist theory was true, you would see
this across time and space, right wing would have
always been against immigration. But it's simply not true.
Left wing heroes like Hugo Chavez were against open
immigration. They understood correctly that open immigration drives down
the wages of the working class. Now that maybe
is, is uh you know, in the name of
humanitarianism, uh maybe it's a, it's a on net
positive thing for humanity. These are good debates to
have. But I don't know any economist that says
when the supply of something goes up, uh the
price of it goes up too, right? I mean,
the price goes down when the supply goes up
and the supply of labor goes up, price goes
down. So, so this used to be considered a
working class issue. The Democrats used to be the
party of the working class. Therefore, the Democrats used
to be more in favor of restricting immigration and
immigration restriction was considered more left wing. Now that's
reversed because the coalitions have reversed. Why have the
coalition's reversed? Again, it's electoral expediency. Who are the
immigrants voting for the immigrants vote overwhelmingly for Democrats?
Well, not overwhelmingly but slightly or at least the
Children of immigrants do when they can vote if
you see. And this again, this is a prediction
that our theory makes. We'll see if this happens.
I'm quite sure it will that if immigrants and
the Children of immigrants start voting Republican, you will
see Democrats start to uh oppose immigration. And Republicans
will be more in favor of open immigration. And
what you will see is people won't say the
Democrats have moved to the right. Instead, they will
just reclassify what's considered left wing and they will
create a new story to encompass the new position.
They'll say, well, the left wing is in favor
of social justice and change towards social justice and
restricting immigration helps promote economic equality, which it does
they are correct. So why is it currently not
considered a matter of social justice? Because you can
spin a social justice story for open immigration too.
So less immigration, you can create a concoct the
social justice story, more immigration, you can concoct the
social justice story. The story remains the same even
as the issues change. And that's why we say
it's like astrology, the astrologer will tell the same
story for different things, right? So one Leo goes
into the office, somebody born in August goes into
the Astro's office and says hi there. I was
born in August. Oh, she'll say you're a Leo.
That means you're very brave. Really? And she'll say,
yeah, tell me about your life. Well, I, I
served in the military. Ah, you're brave. How brave
of you to put your life in your life
for the country. Great. Well, another Leo comes into
the office. Yeah, I was born in August. You're
a Leo, it means you're brave. Really? She'll say,
yeah. Do you serve in the military? No, I
didn't. How brave of you to stand up against
your country's unjust military policies. That's what brave people
do. So it's heads I win tells you the
storytelling. There is nothing that can falsify it as
with astrology, they will find every way to look
at all evidence as confirmation of the theory and
nothing is discon confirmation. So just the point being
same thing. So, so these issues that we consider
so contentious um are actually um uh are actually
very contingent. It's not the Republicans moving to the
right or the Democrats moving to the left. So
there are some contentious issues. However, the big misperception
and again, the misconception of a political spectrum creates
the misperception is that the republicans have moved to
the right Democrats move to the left and that's
why we hate each other and it's simply not
true. There is no left or right to move
to as I think we ab demonstrate abundantly clear
there isn't just one issue, there's many different issues.
And furthermore, the Democrats and Republicans are way closer
than they used to be on many issues. Um
You know, I mean, for instance, gay marriage, there
is a consensus in favor of gay marriage among
both Republicans and Democrats. If the Republicans have moved
so far to the right, which is the typical
narrative today, then why are they far, far, far
more in favor of gay marriage than they were
10 or 15 years ago? That doesn't look like
a right word movement to me. And somebody will
say, well, that's just gay marriage. Exactly. There's many,
many, many issues in politics and instead of talking,
pretending it's just one and saying they've moved to
the right, you have to specify in what ways
each party has become more extreme. But pretending there's
just one issue and saying the Republicans have moved
to the right and the Democrats to the left,
it understates the vast amount of agreement there is
in this country, there's tons of agreement among the
American populace. If you, if you pull the public
and ask them what they want to do about
immigration, they say they want to stop illegal immigration
and bit more high skilled immigrants. There's vast agreement
on that. It's not that we Americans have polarized
and some people hate immigration and some people want
open borders and there's no middle there. It's simply
not true. The vast majority of Americans take a
moderate position on immigration, but you wouldn't know it
because of this myth of left and right, which
pretends that there's just one issue and we've coalesced
at the polls. So what's really going on if
we aren't becoming more extreme in our views isn't
true? Then, then, then what is all the hatred
about? It's what it's what political scientists call affective
polarization, it means hatred, independent of the underlying substance.
So there is increased affective polarization. But our contention
is that what's driving a great deal of that
affective polarization is the myth of left and right.
When you conceive of politics in terms of one
issue, and you believe that everyone that anyone who
disagrees with you on anything is your enemy because
they're on the right side of the spectrum and
therefore an extremist, of course, you're gonna hate them.
But if you give up the nonsense that there's
just one an issue and you say, you know,
there's a whole bunch of issues and everybody's gonna
have a different bundle. Somebody might be in favor
of uh in favor of gay marriage and be
in favor of more aggressive action on climate change
and more in favor of deregulating the economy and
more in favor of lower taxes, right? They're gonna
have a whole distinctive bundle of issues. And if
you look at individual issues and look at individual
people as holding an individual bundle of issues, then
you don't place them on a spectrum and say,
well, you're my enemy because you're on the extreme,
right? Or something like that. Instead you say, you
know what Ricardo holds a set of positions, I
hold a set of positions. Ricardo and Hiram are
going to agree on some things and disagree with,
on, on others. That's OK. That means that Ricardo
is at least in some things my ally, I
don't have to put him on a line and
pretend he's the enemy because he's not. He agrees
with me on some things. Now, Ricardo, I don't
know you that well. So I don't even know
what those things are, but I guarantee you, you
and I agree on a lot of things and
putting you on a spectrum opposite the side of
me would, would create hostility where none existed. And
so the relationship between Hiram and Ricardo right now
is I know for a fact we agree on
things. It's mathematically certain that we do and therefore
we have a point of agreement with which to
begin a dialogue. And if we disagree on things,
I know that Ricardo is a guy of good
faith and any disagreement would be a good faith
disagreement and we could discuss it in civil terms
that would be rendered, rendered impossible if I put
you on a spectrum and said you are one
of the wicked people because you're on the wrong
side of the one big issue, affective polarization is
driven by the myth of Poll
a and on that point of polarization, uh it
is very important to, to really drive that uh
uh message or my guess, because isn't it the
case? I, I'm not sure if you would agree
with me on this point or not, if not,
please tell me. But isn't it the case that
when it comes to polarization and even effective polarization
itself? It is just, I mean, the idea that
people love about it, how about how much of
a problem it really is, is sort of overblown
by what they see on social media and on
the media more generally because, mm, what you get
on social media, almost 100% of the time, isn't
it mostly the most vocal, most, uh, politically motivated
people and the ones that perhaps have, um, higher
stakes in politics and the ones that have an
identity, uh constructed around poli politics and perhaps their
income also comes sometimes for, from generating, I mean,
political content on the internet and elsewhere. Aren't those
the people that really are producing the most extreme
views and all the time claiming that the country
is divided and people do not agree when anymore
and people talk past each other and they can't
really discuss issues anymore because when you go out
on the street and talk with normal people, that's
usually not what you get. Right.
Oh, absolutely. I, 100% agree. Yeah, we can't emphasize
this strongly enough that the myth of left and
right is largely an elite phenomenon. It's an elite
phenomenon. It is much more likely to be held
by politicians, um uh college professors, uh uh media,
media people, right? These are the people that hold
the myth of left and right, the people on
the street. I mean, you, you just talk to
a regular person and just talk to an average
Joe going about their life, you know, going to
their work at a software company or, or, or
going to work on the line at the factory,
just an average everyday person and you ask them,
their politics, it's gonna be all over the place.
It's not gonna fit a one size fits all.
There's only one issue. And so I have to
check all these boxes because I'm in favor of
change or social justice. I mean, you know, you
know, my brother, he's not into politics. Uh, NOT,
not the brother and the co-author with another one.
He lives in Florida. Um, HE'S in favor of
gay marriage, he's getting gay married. Uh, THIS year
he's, uh in favor of less regulation of the
economy. Um, HE'S also, um, has, you know, is
more in favor of kind of environmental regulation and
things like that. He's also in favor of uh
tax cuts and so forth. He's just got this
bundle of positions that doesn't fit him anywhere on
a spectrum because he's not a police political elite.
He doesn't watch Fox News. He doesn't care. He
has a life, he's a good person that just,
you know, goes to work, does his business goes
home, lives a good, decent life. Like, like most
of us strive to do and he's not caught
up therefore in the myth of left and right.
So the, the, the standard explanation when we, when
we talk about how these ideologies are incoherent and
they think these things don't go together. The, the
standard thing to say is um uh well, we
need this simple model for, for the masses, the
elites we can see through it, we can see
more complex, we can talk one issue and you
know, each individual issue, we can go granular but,
but the dummies, the people without our IQ, they
need the simple model. They couldn't handle the complexity,
they can't handle the truth, you know, Jack Nicholson
and a few good men. That's, that's the way
people, that's the way some of my colleagues respond.
The reality is the exact opposite. It is the
elites who need this thing. It is the elites
who need the self justification and the sense of
self righteousness, the political spectrum rings the masses don't
need the spectrum. They get along just fine any
more than they get confused when they go to
the grocery store. Then I'll go to the grocery
store and say, oh my gosh, there's more than
two products. III I can't handle the complexity no,
they go inside and they pick their, your peanut
butter and then they go get their tortillas and
then they go get some apples and some baby
carrots. They just, they just pick their own stuff.
The idea that they get confused because there's more
than two options is, is just absurd. And yet
people continue to harp on this and say we
have to have the political spectrum because people get
confused. If we don't have a spectrum nonsense. There's
just no evidence for that. We handle complexity very
well as human beings. We go granular in every
other domain of, of life. When it comes to
getting dressed in the morning, we say, hey, I'm
gonna wear this pair of pants and this tie
and this shirt and this hat, I mean, whatever
we, we are, we deal with that complexity every
day. We have more than two outfits and we
just do, we do just fine when it comes
to recreation. We don't say, are you on the
recreational left or are you, are you on the
recreational? Right? We don't, we do that. We don't
pretend that there's only one kind of recreation. We
say this guy likes skateboarding. That guy likes mountain
climbing. This person likes to play board games. This
person likes to play video game. We just, we
just talk about what they like to do instead
of pretending that there's only one thing. And so
so we have to get away from this idea
that, that, that the masses can't handle the complexity
of the political spectrum is a tool is a
sop that we throw to the masses who can't
handle it because it's simply not true. It, all
of the sociological data shows that the myth of
left and right is much more pronounced among elites.
The elites are the ones who cling to this
model. They're the ones that need it because it
flatters their egos and it riles up partisan support
for their causes and it makes them, makes we
can go on to this more if you want.
But there are a lot of kind of self
deception reasons why people want to believe them of
left and right and why they get so angry
when people like myself or David Sears at UCL,
a point out that these ideologies are incoherent, it
creates a lot of backlash.
Mhm uh And so I, is that what drives
these artificial division? I mean, is it uh people
who are basically commanding things politically that is it
because of their motivations that this sort of artificial
division persists?
Well, um AAA bunch of reasons, um I mean,
the main reason it persists is the human capacity
for self deception, which is pretty remarkable. See, so
because we call our, our theory, the social theory
of ideology, right? And we say it's, it's about
tribalism, people think it's about philosophy. I'm on the
left because I hold the progressive philosophy. I'm on
the right because I hold the conservative philosophy, that's
what they are telling themselves. But it's, it's not
true. It's, tribe, tribalism explains why these different things
do go together. Now, people look at what we're
saying and they say, oh, so you think people
shouldn't be tribal? We're not saying that it's impossible
not to be tribal. I don't know if you
follow soccer or something. Uh, ARE you, are you
a football fan? I assume?
Yeah. Soccer. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And so I'm, I'm guessing you have your
team, I'm not sure what it is, but I'm
guessing you're a hardcore committed to that team. I'm
not against that. You are tribal Ricardo and that's
fine. I am a tribal New York Jets fan,
you know, II, I cheer for the Jets regardless
of what they do, regardless of who plays for
them. But I admit that's what I'm doing. And
so the main reason the political spectrum persists is
because it gives us the illusion that we are
being philosophical. We are being tribal. It allows us
to, to be tribal without feeling tribal. I mean,
I, if I were to go up to Senator
Elizabeth Warren today and say Senator Warren, you hold
every single position that your party holds. I mean,
there are 50 positions here and you check the
box on every single one of them. You're a
tribal lemming, you can't think for yourself. You're just
going along with the team. Now, that's obviously the
truth, you know it. And I know it and
I'm guessing deep down she knows it, but she
doesn't want to admit it to herself because it's
much funner for her to believe. No, no, no,
I'm a progressive, I stand for the progressive philosophy
and all of these issues are just manifestations of
that one issue of progress. So there's one issue
in politics. You're either a progressive who believes in
change for social justice or you are an evil
right winger who wants to preserve and conserve privilege
and stop change because you don't like social justice.
That is such a flattering way for Senator Warren
to think and I don't mean to pick on
her, I could pick on any Republican just as
easily, right? They all, they all believe the same
myth. They would, they would concoct the exact same
story. So it's all of our politicians who claim
I'm a conservative, I'm a liberal. You know, there,
it's a delusion. But how much better is that
delusion than admitting the reality that you're just being
a lemming, say that I just conform to my
tribe. I can't think for myself. Uh Monkey, see
monkey do. I, I can't think so. I, I
don't want to think for myself and I want
to feel right while I conform and I wanna
embrace the entirety of the Democratic platform so that
I can get, you know, hardcore support and, and
run for president and be supported by my tribe.
Uh And so I can't dissent from any of
the things. But instead of admitting that you're just
conforming, she's gonna tell herself this, this story, this
very self flattering story of social justice progress. And
that's why I adhere to the positions I do.
So, the main reason it persists is self deception.
We humans are tribal and we all know that.
But what has come out in the psychology literature
in just the last 1020 years is the degree
to which we humans feel the need to disguise
our tribalism. The metaphor that Jonathan he used is
the elephant and the rider, right? So you got
this elephant and the elephant is going where it
wants, you can't control the elephant. It's too big,
it's too powerful. It doesn't care where you want
to go, it's gonna go where it wants to
go. So here's the rider being carried along by
the elephant. But then the rider gets to where
the elephant wanted to go. And the writer tells
himself a very uh fun story about, well, this
is where I wanted to go all along and
I was actually in control the whole time. This
story is flattering to the writer, but it's true.
So he says that emotions are the elephant and
reason is the writer and I don't think that's
always true. I think we humans can be reasonable
and by having better conceptual schemes, we can be
more reasonable. But when it comes to the political
spectrum, it is an irrational model. And the reason
we adhere to that irrational model is because it
flatters ourselves and, and it allows us to give
to our tribal emotions without admitting that's what we're
doing.
I, I mean, but even with all of that
and all the self deception is it still baffles
me a little bit that people who are extremely
politically motivated or that, I mean, identify themselves with
a particular political party political movement or something like
that. I mean, how is it that they do
not reps? At least, sometimes pause a little bit
and think about themselves and look at the, uh,
uh, at the beliefs that their political party e
spouses and stuff like that and think, oh, my
God. I agree with 100 out of 100 of
these political issues with them. I mean, what, what
are the chances that someone normal, uh, that, that
would happen to someone normal? Right. I mean, don't
you think that even with the self deception, perhaps
there are a few people out there, at least
a few of them that notice this, but they
just can't afford to not go along with the
party, let's say.
Yeah. Yeah. So you see this happen, right? Um,
BECAUSE they see the consequences of it. So you,
you probably may have heard of Senator Jeff Flake,
I believe a senator from Arizona and he didn't
like what the direction the party was going when
it nominated Donald Trump. And he didn't believe in
Trump's big government and he didn't believe in Trump's
uh crassness and his personal flaws. Uh AND, and
his, uh and his kind of disturbing nationalism. He
didn't agree with these things. Now, what most people
in the Republican Party did is they simply changed
their views to fit what Trump was doing and
then made up a story after the fact to
say I'm being conservative, I'm consistent. Uh uh TH
this, this is all part of my conservative philosophy,
but you believe the opposite thing 10 years ago.
Oh, what circumstances have a change? And the philosophy
is being applied differently, right? They, they would go
and deceive themselves. But somebody like Jeff Blake, he
says, no, no, no, this, this goes against my
deepest health convictions. I'm not going along with it.
But what happened to Jeff Flake, right? He gets
voted out of office. You have to if you're
not one of the team. So, so principles are
not rewarded politically. If you hold faster principles and
say I have beliefs and I believe these things
out of a matter of conviction, then you're going
to not match up with the party on everything.
And as the party changes, you will find yourself
um not fitting in with the party. And so
you have an incentive to perpetuate the method of
left and right to pretend that everything no matter
what it is and it could be anything but
it all promotes conservatism or progressivism that allows you
to be tribal, it allows you to continue to
go along with the tribe and, and, and, and,
and be in lockstep with them and therefore avoid
the kinds of things that have happened to Jeff
Flake or Tulsi Gabbard on the democratic side. Right.
Dissent does not reward you. And since independent thinking
and principle leads to dissent, you see, uh leads
to dissent and dissent then leads to um being
ejected from positions of influence. That's why you see
less dissent ergo less independent thinking. And so the
myth of left and right is, is just such
a, a wonderful tool to covers people peop to
cover people's tribal sins instead of admitting that's what
they're doing. Concocting stories is a, is a much
uh is a much more self flattering route to
go.
So I've, I've, I think we've already talked about
some of the main consequences that this sort of
thinking that people have about how politics works and
the myth, the myth of left and right, some
of the consequences that it has. Do you think
it's possible for us to move beyond the sort
of essentialist view of ideology? And if so, how
can we do it?
Yeah. So, um so yes, it is possible and,
and a couple of things help me know that
one is just historical reality. We used to not
have a political spectrum. The same way that the
four humors theory didn't exist, pe people invented it,
you know, at some point in time and then
it spread, it spread like a virus and it
did its terrible damage and then people woke up
and moved beyond it. So if, if doctors could
get beyond the four humors theory, just by being
rational and saying, my goodness, look at all the
people that are killing and then used scientific criteria
of falsification and saying what it, what would be
discon confirming evidence. And then seeing that discon confirming
evidence in the theory, they were holding and being
willing to discard the theory by being rational and
scientific. Well, sure, of course, we can get moved
beyond the myth of left and right too because
it's every bit as false as the four humorous
theory. Um So it, it came into existence and
since people used to not have it, well, there's
no reason we couldn't go back to the way
we were before. It's, there's no reason we couldn't
go back to the time of Andrew Jackson or
Thomas Jefferson or something when they didn't have this
delusion of, of a single issue in politics. OK.
So we know it's possible. Um Second, the reason
what gives me hope when I get very despairing
because the myth of left and right is so
entrenched, what gives me hope is when I again,
the common people, I was talking about before, but
especially young people, it seems like the older generation
is very, um rigid and they have had this
model their entire lives. They, they, they have gotten
their sense of political identity from this model and
they're very reluctant to surrender it. I mean, they
have an entire lifetime of investment in the identity
of conservative or progressive and that lifetime of work
and the idea that you're, you know, 70 years
old and gonna say uh yeah, I've been wrong
all these years. I'm I I shouldn't have been
a progressive in the first place. My life was
a way, you know, that is very hard for
them to do, understandably. Not only because there's a
little less cognitive plasticity or neuroplasticity and cognitive flexibility
as you get older. Uh But also because of
the sunk cost fallacy, right? You've invested in this
thing your whole life. But when I talk to
younger people very hard because when I bring up
our theory, I get almost no pushback from young
people. I even these so called, you know, campus
left wing radicals even then when I talk to
them, they, they say, yeah, that sounds right to
me, you know, uh they don't see things in,
in uni dimensional terms. Uh So, so when you
talk to regular people who aren't invested in the
model, they see the wisdom in it, they see
the common sense in it and they buy into
it. So there is some evidence that it's weakening.
There is some evidence that younger generations don't look
at politics in uni dimensional terms and that's very
heartening. Now, the older generation doesn't understand this right
to them. It's just this big puzzle. How is
it that young people are, uh you know, in
favor of deregulation of the economy, but also in
favor of more aggressive action on climate change, what's
going on. They're supposed to be on the left.
What's happening? You have to stop thinking in terms
of left and right. You have to start saying
that climate change is one issue and regulation of
the economy is an entirely different issue. And there's
nothing like cognitively dissident or wrong with holding one
position on one and then another position or another
because they're two totally different issues. So, and this
solves a lot of puzzles. I mean, I'm just
amazed at how many commentators just their head is
about to explode. I I don't get this what's
going on like, like when um the Koch brothers
partnered with George Soros to create an Institute for
Peace and people's heads were exploding. How is this?
These Koch brothers who are on the far extreme,
right? Are partnering with George Soros on the far
extreme left. What is going on? How are we
to understand this? We have to come up with
some kind of theory. No, you don't. It's really,
really simple. Here's how simple it is. There's this
thing called peace not left wing, not right wing,
just peace. And the Koch brothers are in favor
of peace and George Soros is in favor of
peace and they're fighting for a common cause. As
soon as you stop trying to place these people
on an imaginary line. It's amazing how quickly so
many of our political puzzles resolve. There is no
puzzle. We have created false problems where problems don't
exist. How can we solve the thing of the
extreme left making common cause of extreme? There is
no left, there is no right. There's simply the
question of, do you believe in more or less
peace, more or less military action to resolve international
dilemmas? And both the Kochs and sorrows find themselves
on the same side of that one issue. And
once you look at it that way in a
granular way, all of these puzzles that are making
pundits head explode, just, just go away. It, it
really is a simple model. It's a common sense
model and all of the supports it. So we're
just talking not just in favor of rationality, but
by God goodness, common sense people think, well, you're,
you're putting forward this theory that common people can't
understand. Oh, give me a break. That's just silly.
Again. That's more self flattering nonsense. The common people
get it just fine. It's actually the elites who
have the hardest time with this going up to
a person in the street and saying, you know
what there's more than one issue in politics they
say. Yeah, of course. And, yeah, exactly. It's only
the college professors who fight against this. No, no,
no. There has to be one, there has to
be just one issue. You're either in favor of
change in social justice or you're against these things.
And I'm on the side of social justice. The
college professor believes that because he wants to flatter
himself that he's one of the good guys that
all of his political positions which just happen to
align with everything the Democratic Party believes are all
fighting for the cause of social justice that is
so flattering to them. And so they're the ones
who believe it, not the person on the street.
So the power of the common people generally trumps
the power of elites in the long term. And
I think that's gonna happen here too
great. So let's send on that hopeful note and
the book is again the myth of left and
right how the political spectrum misleads and harms America.
I'm leaving a link to it in the description
of the interview. And apart from the book, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and the rest of your work on the
internet?
Oh yes, I am hiding on the internet. I'm
not on social media for the same reason. I'm
not on cocaine, but they're welcome to read the
book. And uh I do respond to emails. So
if they'd like to email me, I love to
hear from people.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
fun to talk with you.
It's been my pleasure, Ricardo. Thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten bear, no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors,
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
Nai Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yasa, dear Ro Ro Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo
Stassi na me, Gary G Alman, Sam of Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lati Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter. Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick, Mark Kempel Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica No Week, Linda Brendan
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca Stein, Tom Veg and
Bernard N Corti Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Si, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.